Coronary Heart Disease
< Back To
Home
Coronary Heart Disease
Coronary Heart Disease
MENU
< Back To
Home
Coronary Heart Disease
What Is Coronary Heart Disease?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Risk Factors
Causes and Prevention
Treatment
Living With
Women and Heart Disease
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Coronary Heart Disease
Coronary Heart Disease
What Is Coronary Heart Disease?
Language switcher
English
Español
Heart disease is a general term for conditions that affect the heart’s structure and how it works. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States.
Coronary heart disease
is a type of heart disease that occurs when the
arteries
artery
(ARR-tuh-ree):
A blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the organs. Most arteries carry oxygenated blood. The pulmonary arteries carry deoxygenated blood away from the heart to the lungs.
of the heart cannot deliver enough
oxygen
oxygen
(OK-sih-jen):
A gas that is essential for humans and other animals to live. It is breathed into the lungs from the air. In the lungs, it enters the bloodstream, where red blood cells transport it to cells throughout your body.
-rich blood to the heart muscle due to narrowing from the buildup of fatty deposits called
plaque
plaque
(Plak):
A substance made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. In some cardiovascular diseases, plaque builds up and hardens in arteries. Plaque buildup reduces blood flow and makes it more likely that blood clots will form in the arteries. These blood clots can partially or completely block blood flow and oxygen delivery to the heart, brain, kidneys, or legs, arms, or pelvis.
. It is also sometimes called coronary artery disease or ischemic heart disease.
Coronary heart disease is the most common type of heart disease. In 2022, coronary heart disease caused 371,506 deaths in the United States.
Symptoms
of coronary heart disease vary from person to person. About 1 in 20 adults aged 20 and older have coronary heart disease. But many people don't know they have the disease until they have
chest pain
; the blood flow to their heart is blocked, causing a
heart attack
; or their heart suddenly stops pumping blood, also known as
cardiac arrest
Coronary heart disease affects the larger coronary arteries on the surface of the heart. It is
caused
by deposits of
cholesterol
cholesterol
(koh-LES-teh-rol):
A waxy, fatlike substance that is found in all the cells of the body. High blood cholesterol increases the risk of developing coronary heart disease.
, a waxy substance that builds up inside the lining of the coronary arteries, forming
plaque
plaque
(Plak):
A substance made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. In some cardiovascular diseases, plaque builds up and hardens in arteries. Plaque buildup reduces blood flow and makes it more likely that blood clots will form in the arteries. These blood clots can partially or completely block blood flow and oxygen delivery to the heart, brain, kidneys, or legs, arms, or pelvis.
. This plaque can partly or completely block blood flow in the arteries of the heart:
Obstructive coronary artery disease
means that the diameter of a large coronary artery is blocked by 50% or more.
Nonobstructive coronary artery disease
means that the blood flow in a large coronary artery is blocked less than 50%.
Coronary microvascular disease
means blood flow into the tiny arteries within the heart muscle is blocked. This happens when there is damage to the inner walls of the heart's small blood vessels. Coronary microvascular disease is more common in
women
For most people, coronary heart disease is
preventable
with a
heart-healthy lifestyle
and medicines. You may be able to stop or reverse plaque buildup in coronary arteries.
Learn more about
how the heart works
Your healthcare provider will
diagnose
coronary heart disease based on your
symptoms
, your medical and family history, your
risk factors
, and the results from
heart tests
If you have coronary heart disease, you may need heart-healthy lifestyle changes, medicines,
surgery
, or a combination of these to manage your condition and
prevent serious problems
FACTSHEET
Know the Difference
Learn basic facts about the various diseases that affect the heart.
View the fact sheet
Last updated on
December 27, 2024