Heart Failure
< Back To
Home
Heart Failure
Heart Failure
MENU
< Back To
Home
Heart Failure
What Is Heart Failure?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment
Living With Heart Failure
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheet and Handouts
Research
Heart Failure
Heart Failure
What Is Heart Failure?
Language switcher
English
Español
Heart failure, also known as congestive heart failure, is a condition that develops when your heart doesn’t pump enough blood for your body’s needs. This can happen if your heart can’t fill up with enough blood. It can also happen when your heart is too weak to pump properly. The term "heart failure" does not mean that your heart has stopped. However, heart failure is a serious condition that needs medical care.
More than 6 million adults in the United States have heart failure, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Children can also have heart failure, but this health topic focuses on heart failure in adults.
Heart failure can develop suddenly (the acute kind) or over time as your heart gets weaker (the chronic kind). It can affect one or both sides of your heart. Left-sided and right-sided heart failure may have different causes. Most often, heart failure is
caused
by another medical condition that damages your heart. This includes
coronary heart disease
heart inflammation
high blood pressure
cardiomyopathy
, or an irregular heartbeat. Heart failure may not cause
symptoms
right away. But eventually, you may feel tired and short of breath and notice fluid buildup in your lower body, around your stomach, or your neck.
Heart failure can damage your liver or kidneys. Other conditions it can lead to include
pulmonary hypertension
or other heart conditions, such as an
irregular heartbeat
heart valve disease
, and
sudden cardiac arrest
Your doctor will
diagnose
heart failure based on your medical and family history, a physical exam, and results from imaging and blood tests.
Currently, heart failure is a serious condition that has no cure. However,
treatment
such as healthy lifestyle changes, medicines, some devices, and procedures can help many people have a higher quality of life. Visit the
Living With
section to learn more.
Visit
The Heart Truth
to learn about heart disease in women.
Last updated on
March 24, 2022